This is an interview with Dr. William B. Harris,
professor of chemical engineering at Texas A&M
University. Today's date is October 12, 1981.
Let's begin, Dr. Harris, by you telling us
something about your early years in Loveland,
Colorado. You were born there in 1919. Well,
Loveland, Colorado is probably the best part of
the world to be born in and raised as a boy because
it's the so-called gateway to Estes Park or the
Rocky Mountain National Park. It's 50 miles north
of Denver. And I went to school, grade school and
high school in Loveland. In 1933, 37, I should say,
I went to the University of Colorado at Boulder.
What was your father's occupation? He was a
retired farmer who had gone into the insurance
business and actually had done pretty good as a
farmer and the insurance was something to keep him
out of the house, I believe. How did he happen to
settle in Colorado? My folks were all pioneers, I
guess. The type that crossed the prairies and
settled the west. For example, a first irrigation
ditch in Colorado was dug and created by my
grandfather. Where did your grandfather
immigrate? He came from Missouri, northern
Arkansas. I'm not exactly sure, but it was part of
the throes of the aftermath of the Civil War. I know
that at one time they had a lot of land with a lot of
slaves and this all got torn up so most of the family
moved to Colorado. A rather interesting story
there. My grandfather went to Colorado with a
covered wagon and the woman he married was with
another covered wagon train. The two of them met in
what is now Denver. At that time it was Arvada.
white spot on the river. What was that? Arvada,
Colorado. It was just a little bit. A-B-A
A-R-V-A-D-A It's now a suburb of Denver. Anyhow,
my grandmother was out in the middle of the road
with her bloomers tucked up out of the river,
washing clothes. Granddad apparently rode out on
his horse out there to look at her and announced to
the world he was going to marry her, which they
eventually did. I used to get a lot of interesting
stories about the Wild West that I, the pioneers
that I wish I could remember. Some of them are
absolutely fascinating. People had a different
attitude toward life then than they do now, that's
for sure.
I had a great uncle who put the first dam across the
big Thompson River for irrigation, which is still
there and still being used. with a home supply
ditch corporation.
In any event, we went to 37, graduated from high
school, and went to the university. What year did
you graduate? 1937. And went to the University of
Colorado to take chemical engineering. Chemical
engineering was not too well known at that time.
But I'd had chemistry in high school, which was
great fun because we were allowed to make
firecrackers and various other things, which
they no longer allow students to do. And since I
liked mechanisms in general, chem engineering
sounded like a good thing to go into. This, of
course, was a four-year curriculum. And due
course, we graduated and went to work at Buffalo,
New York, with the National Aniline Division of
Allied Chemical and Dye Corporation. What was
that again? National Aniline Division of Allied
Chemical and Aniline. A-N-I-L-I-N-E.
This is a dye stuff corporation. And dye stuffs are
rather complex organic chemistry. It's rather
interesting in those days most of the organic
chemical industry was based upon coal and then of
course switched over into what we call
petrochemicals made from petroleum and now we're
in the process of switching back to sort of where I
started out, benzene and things like this from
coal again. This was a rather interesting job. I
started out in production for about a year and
apparently made such a pest of myself they moved me
over into the research department which is in some
ways rather disastrous since everybody else had a
PhD in chemistry and it wasn't quite the place for a
BS chemical engineer. Turned out it was very good,
however, because they had a policy there that for
every new process that was developed by the
research department, it was taken out and
demonstrated in the plant before the production
people were given the progen.
This is something that does take chem
engineering, so I ended up doing much of the chem
engineering for the entire research department,
which was a great experience. The fact is, I guess I
got involved in about every chemical reaction
that's labeled except the Grenard reaction. But
this would be involved, they'd call me in and say,
Dr. So-and-so's got a process that uses 35 ether
extractions, which is impractical and also can't
use ether in the plant. Harris take it out of the
plant and make it, which is chem engineering
rather than basic research in chemistry. And so I
enjoyed it quite a bit. I did not like Buffalo very
well. How long were you there? I was there six
years. What happened is the war broke out in 1941
and of course the war disrupted everything.
I got shifted off into this research program, and
one of the things I was working on was what they call
Atabrin, or Quinacrin, which is an anti-malarial
drug. Can you spell those? A-T-A-B-R-I-N, and
another name for it is Quinacrin, Q-U-I-N,
Q-U-I-N-E, Quinacrin. I think that's right. It's
been a while. Anyhow, the Japanese had taken over
all the South Sea islands where the quinine was
produced, and it was impossible for us to invade
the South Sea islands and conduct any kind of a war
program without quinine. So someone captured
some German soldiers in North Africa. The
Germans, being very methodical, had pre-planned
all this, and they had developed an anti-malarial
that worked somewhat similar to quinine. And so
they brought some of the tablets back, and we were
given the job of mass producing this for our armed
forces. As a result, I never did serve in the armed
forces. I spent my time working with this adamant,
which incidentally is a very yellow material, and
after you work with it a while, you begin to look
like you were made of yellow rather than white.
met my wife in Buffalo, New York, which was one of
the pluses of the area. They also had us, of course,
frozen into our jobs as well as frozen into our
salaries, so that the first six years of my life, as
far as increasing my salary is concerned, were
pretty non-productive. It turned out that if you
were a union man, a laborer, You could get periodic
raises, but if you were on salary, you were frozen
at whatever salary you had. So just about every
supervisor in the plant was making less money than
the most menial of workers, which is some kind of a
commentary on politics in general.
I never did like Buffalo simply because it's too
dang cold. The winter lasts approximately nine
months, and the summer a couple of days type of
thing to me. So as soon as the war was over and I had
the opportunity, I moved to Benson, Arizona,
which is about as far from snow and cold as you can
get, and went to work with the Apache Powder
Company of Benson, Arizona. What year was this?
This would be in 1946. But you worked in Buffalo all
through the war? All through the war. You see, you
couldn't change your job then. And as soon as I
could get out of Buffalo, I got out. How did your
wife feel about leaving? She didn't much care for
it. For leaving it? For leaving it. Now she will
kind of grin and say it was probably the best thing
we've ever done, but at the time it was quite a
strain on things, I'll have to admit that.
Particularly going as far as Arizona, which got
her away from her parents a long distance and
homesick, and a total change. Around Buffalo it
was very green and verdant, and the Arizona desert
is just the opposite. Arizona is a pretty good
place for a man to live. There's a lot of hunting and
rough country to play in, but for women, there's
not even, people in Benson, which is only 900
people in the town, 960, didn't even grow grass in
their yards. It was all sand and it was kind of a
desolate area, so she never did like it very well. I
enjoyed it because I had a very good job. I went
there as a research engineer, chemist. In those
days, chemists in the chem engineers weren't as
well differentiated as now. And after being there
about three and a half years, the company decided
to about triple its size. And this whole task was on
my shoulders, which was a very interesting thing.
I'd never gotten involved in construction and
design before like that.
I designed the buildings. I hired the crew. I laid
out narrow gauge railroads and did all kinds of
things that I would never have thought as a chem
engineer I would ever be doing. And in the midst of
all this, I got promoted to the title of technical
supervisor for the company. So I was in charge of
their engineering and development, the product
quality control program, customer relations,
safety and health, which is a big thing in an
explosives plant. In general, anything that had
any technical aspects to it was under my charge. I
enjoyed it. It was a good job. It was a small town,
which I have always enjoyed. My wife didn't like
it, and the job was very demanding. In those days,
they didn't have what we call human engineering
now. The general idea was if you worked hard eight
hours a day and didn't worry, someday you could be
the boss and work 16 hours a day and have all the
worry. I was working usually from 70 to 80 hours a
week, which means just about all your waking time.
But when you enjoy it, this is not particularly
bad. It's bad for your family. This was brought
home to me very much because One Sunday, I was out at
the plant with the plant manager. We were going
over a bunch of blueprints by ourselves, a big
empty office building, of course. And the PX board
started buzzing, so I plugged it in. And it was
Stanford University calling the plant manager to
tell him that his son had just been found in the
automobile
with an exhaust hose stuck into the window and, of
course, was dead by suicide. This was of course a
big tragedy and the plant manager jumped in the
company car that we had there and took off
immediately and left me there to call my wife to
come and get me. So I had about a half hour of
thinking before my wife got there. And I could
pretty well perceive why this poor kid had
committed suicide because his dad had been too
busy all the time to really be much of a father. And
since he had the best job in town, his mother felt
like she was sort of the queen bee of the society and
didn't have much time either. So they had great
expectations for the boy, but he was just a sort of
an average kid and couldn't live up to these
expectations. Then I got to thinking I had a son who
was about three years old, about two and a half
perhaps, that I hadn't seen awake for at least five
to six weeks. You know, you just look in the door and
see them laying there, and I got to thinking,
that's pretty dumb. By the time my wife got out to
the plant, I told her I was going to quit, figuring
that she'd probably raise the roof one way or
another, and all she did was say, great, let's move
back where my folks live. I told her no. I was going
to find a job that was dignified, that I didn't have
to be ashamed of. It was in a relatively good
climate. a cultural place that had things to do and
good schools for children. But I'll be damned if I
was going to spend the rest of my life trying to
become a plant manager or president of the company
because it's just there were too many things you
had to sacrifice at that time at least in order to
have that type of work. So in casting about, it
looked like a university environment here at
College Station was just about the best thing that
would fit that mold. Certainly a nice climate. a
job that you don't have to be ashamed of, a cultural
place, good schools, and close enough to Buffalo
that you can make it once or twice a year, which is
enough to visit in-laws generally anyhow. So I
came here to work initially as a research engineer
with the Cotton Seed Products Research
Laboratory, which was part of the TEAS at that
time, and that was in 1953.
So I stayed approximately six, six and a half years
at Apache Powder and then moved here. Of course,
I've been here ever since. The Cotton Seed
Products Research Laboratory at that time
concentrated entirely on, or almost entirely on,
cotton seed problems. There were about 500 cotton
seed oil mills in the state at that time. It was a big
industry and appropriate that the college
conduct research in this area. It was funded by a
separate granting from the Cotton Research
Committee, which was a division of the state
legislature.
In the process of this work, people, myself and
others at the, and prior to me actually too,
developed considerable improvements in the
handling and processing of cottonseed which of
course the idea is you get cottonseed oil which is a
edible made into margarine or cooking oil and lint
and holes and other products that are useful
elsewhere.
We started working and on solvent extraction of
cottonseed oil, which was a better process than
the hydraulic processes that had been employed.
One of the characteristics of this, though, it
becomes more and more like a chemical engineering
plant, which lends itself to all-year production
rather than seasonal operation, and huge
operations rather than comparatively small
localized plants. And I understand as a result of
that now the number of oil mills in the state of
Texas has dwindled to a small, a very small
fraction of the roughly 400 or 500, about 500 that
were here when I first came. As a result, the
oilseeds laboratory or cottonseed laboratory
has gone through a progression of names and I think
it's now called the Food and Protein Research
Center as they've shifted into different areas.
as the need for research and the number of
companies involved has become limited in the
cottonseed industry of Texas by itself. About
1958, we had a change in administration in Tees and
the School of Engineering. We got a new dean, Dr.
Calhoun. who came in with the concept that people
who do research should teach, and particularly
people that teach should do research. Dr. Calhoun
is now vice president of engineering and
renewable resources.
So one day, rather unexpectedly, I got a phone call
informing me that I was now also an associate
professor in the Chem Engineering Department.
Did you work in graduate programs? No. I hadn't
even been inside a classroom since I got out in
1941, and all of a sudden I was going to teach a
course the following Monday.
Kind of perturbed me, but the head of the
department at that time, Dr. Lindsay, just sort of
grinned and says, well, you'll find that you know a
lot more than the students do, so you'll make out
all right, which which turned out to be a very true
statement. So I started teaching part-time for
the chem engineering department and researching
part-time then in the cotton seed products
laboratory. That was in 58. This was in 58. I
found, as many people do once I got started in
teaching, that this was a very fascinating
occupation and one that I thoroughly enjoyed.
I had some problems. When I came here, one of the
conditions was that I would be allowed to go ahead
and get an advanced degree. And I had started on my
master's program, but of course we have in the
catalog rules against granting advanced degrees
to people who are ranked as professors at the
university, which is a perfectly understandable
restriction. And because of the salary I made as a
research engineer, I had been classified as an
associate professor, which meant that
theoretically I wasn't supposed to get an
advanced degree. I was able to convince everybody
that I'd already been started on this program and I
should be allowed to finish, and so I got my
master's of chemical engineering here at A&M in
1960.
I was blocked from going any further as far as
getting an advanced degree here at A&M. I could
take all the graduate courses I wanted, but they
were meaningless as far as applying to any kind of a
degree program. I proceeded to take graduate
courses. I got a whole armload of them, but
primarily just, I guess, for my own edification
because it did not enable me move ahead as far as
becoming a PhD was concerned. So all during the
60s, I was working then under two hats for the
cottonseed lab and for chem engineering
department. And gradually, 1960
or 61, I'd have to look it up now. It's amazing how
insignificant it is now and how important it was at
the time. But this didn't, I ran into some problems
here because of course to get promotions within
the organization here, particularly in the
teaching area, you really ought to have something
more than a master's degree. And I felt that I
needed to do something, but at the same time I was
making such a salary that I couldn't afford to just
take off and go somewhere and get a PhD and then
hopefully return. About 1969, the legislature
passed a law permitting the colleges to fund
sabbatical leaves. So I immediately applied for a
sabbatical leave, which was granted, to go ahead
and study to get a PhD. And my understanding, this
was the only one that was granted for the, to go
ahead and work on an advanced degree at the The
people who put this program together decided one
of the very first rules was that no one would be
given a sabbatical to do this.
Dean Benson, however, was then in charge of the
Engineering and Experiment Station, and he was
able to convince whoever was involved that this
would be an appropriate thing. So I did get this
sabbatical leave. So in 69, I went to the Colorado
State University. Fort Collins, Colorado. Now,
one of my reasons, of course, was I enjoyed
Colorado when I was young, and I wanted to get back
into that area as much as possible. But the main
reason was I had gotten into a very, very
interesting subject in the cottonseed research
work, which was the cooling of cottonseed. These
piles of cottonseed cost well over a million
dollars. And of course, they're organic and
subject to mold and spoilage. So the way they
control this is pulling air through the pile of
seed to a collecting duct system on the bottom of
the pile and air cools the seed and dries it out so
that it stays without degradation.
The equations for this kind of thing though is a
typical fluid flow through porous media type of
thing. It's the same as you have there for
underground oil reservoirs or hydrology science
of aquifers. It turns out that Colorado State
University is probably one of the best places in
the world to study fluid flow through porous
media. And I kind of struck a deal with the
agricultural engineering department there.
who, probably agricultural engineers, have been
more interested in fluid flow through porous
media for longer, I guess, than the petroleum
people, because, of course, this is involved in
the movement of moisture to the plants, and
particularly involved in irrigation, which
Colorado is a great irrigated area. So, since that
was my interest, I went to the ag engineering
department rather than through a normal chemical
engineering department somewhere else.
And I'm kind of proud of this because I spent one
year at Colorado and did get my PhD, which is
probably I guess a world record for getting a PhD.
One reason I was able to do this though is that they
allowed me to use the research that I had been doing
for the cotton seed products laboratory as the
basis of my thesis. So mainly the problem was
getting the course credits out of the way.
Unfortunately, only 12 hours of my courses here
could be transferred and the rest of it I had to take
at location in Colorado. While I was in Colorado,
they had a reorganization of the cottonseed
products research laboratory and had kind of come
to the conclusion that this split work between two
departments was not very, really the best way of
handling things. And apparently in my absence
there was a big discussion as to whether I would go
back and work full time for the cottonseed lab or
full time for the chem engineering department.
And I don't know exactly just how, what all
happened, but I was informed while I was gone that
when I came back I would be a full time employee of
the chem engineering department. So since then, I
have not been active in the cottonseed research or
food proteins research area.
I
think it was 1973 before I finally got my thesis
approved and my dissertation approved and got my
actual degree from Colorado State. Shortly
thereafter, I was promoted to full professor in
the Department of Chem Engineering, which I've
been since, of course.
I think our department has been a very good
department because it has a good blend of people
who are what I would call very theoretical, which
you need in an academic area, and people who are
very practical or engineering-oriented, which I
consider myself to be. so that we all sort of
complement each other.
My research program has been for quite some time.
We started back in 1963.
I worked for about six months temporarily for and
with Dr. Davison of the Chem Engineering
Department on water desalination. And in the
process of working on that, we got involved in
solar energy. So when I became full time in the
chemical engineering department, Dr. Davison
and I continued working together on the solar
energy research program. In the course of this, we
came across what we think is a very, very, very
worthwhile idea as far as solar energy is
concerned. We kind of think at this moment that we
were probably 10 or 15 years ahead of our time. But
basically the problem with heating buildings
with solar energy is that you want to heat
buildings in the wintertime and you want to
therefore collect the sun during the wintertime.
But unfortunately the wintertime is winter
because we don't have much sunshine. The real time
to collect solar energy is the summer or all year
round and then use this energy during the winter.
So obviously one of the problems would be figure
out how you could store solar energy for six months
or longer periods without losing it and we came up
with a very very useful concept
which we call the solitaire system
actually we came up with this concept quite some
time before we actually got to any program going in
chem engineering here, I mean in solar work here at
the department. Basically what we proposed doing
was pumping water from an underground aquifer,
from a well in other words, particularly during
the summer but all year long really, running it
through solar heaters where the water would get
hot and then take this hot water and pump it down
another well back into the aquifer. And the
concept is that the aquifer, this underground
water-filled strata, is in essence a very, very
cheap insulated mammoth storage tank. In other
words, the ground is a very good insulator. So the
idea is you store the hot water, and then when
winter comes, you pump the hot water out from under
the ground around the various buildings like we
have here on the campus, which all the buildings
are heated by hot water being pumped from the
powerhouses.
This has a lot of merit, and besides the fact that
you collect the energy all year round, you no
longer have your capital that you've put into the
solar heaters just sitting idle most of the year
and used only during the winter. And since the
solar energy business is totally capital
intensive, this is very important. But the solar
heaters operated during the summertime are much
more efficient than during the winter. because in
the winter solar heaters are surrounded by ice
cold air and they lose a good share of their energy
to the surrounding air whereas in the summer they
are surrounded by much warmer air and their
efficiency is therefore better. So not only do you
use your capital all year round you can collect
about five times as much energy per square foot of
heater or per dollar is worth a heater but the
heaters are more efficient and since this kind of a
system would use a very large solar heating array,
you get away from the very expensive idea of
putting very small heaters custom made and custom
installed on each building. It becomes a utility
type system.
It also became rather apparent in this that if you
can store hot water underground, you can store
cold water. So the analog is to take the pump water
out from under the aquifer during the winter,
spray it into the air, a spray pond, get it close to
freezing using the natural coolness of the winter
and store cold water. And then of course in the
summer you would air condition your buildings
just as they're done here again on the campus by
pumping chilled water from a central source to the
various buildings. This, if you look at it, is
economically a very, very, very attractive way of
getting air conditioning. So we had this scheme
called the Solitaire Scheme which appears to be
economic and answer and solve the problems that
keep solar energy from being widely used. It had
one trouble. You can't do it on a small scale. You
can't store a small quantity of water anywhere. It
has to be a large quantity stored underground and
therefore it becomes a rather expensive
installation. It's fine for say air conditioning
a campus but it wouldn't work at all for air
conditioning a home. Nor can you actually study it
in the laboratory. There's no way you can build a
sand pile or something and put a little water in it
and expect it to stay hot until next summer. So even
though you can model and the work that I've done
Colorado State on my PhD was in the area of aquifer
flow through porous media you can model and you can
show in a mathematical sense exactly what's going
to happen but since it costs roughly a million
dollars or so to put one of these systems in we
haven't been able to find anyone with a million
dollars yet everybody that has the money that
looks at it and says it's a great idea show me one
that's working And of course, there is none
working. So that has been a problem. We did get a
small grant from the Department of Energy to study
the storage of cold water, which we did out on the
river bottom farm. We knew that we wouldn't be able
to store the water because that was a 65 foot deep
aquifer, which is almost like a sandbar out in the
river, and a considerable amount of water
movement through that type of a formation. But at
least we were able to demonstrate that the system
was feasible. As a matter of fact, we put down out of
a pond that was only 50 foot by 100 foot over 10
million gallons of ice cold water underground,
which means that on a good cold night in the winter
here, this 50 by 100 foot pond was approximately a
200 ton air conditioner, where the only power cost
was for the cost of spraying the water into the
spray. So you can see it has a great advantage over
refrigeration because you're using the natural
cold air to do the cooling. This particular
cooling thing is being tried, this will be tried
this winter in a shopping center in Tuscogee,
Alabama. Where?
K-O-G-E-E. I think it's the capital of Alabama.
Anyhow, it's where the University of Alabama is
located.
We're a little bit concerned because we don't know
what kind of an aquifer they have. Tuscaloosa.
Yeah, Tuscaloosa. I'm sorry. Tuscogee, that's
Florida, isn't it? I think you were getting
Tuscaloosa and Tuskegee. Okay, all right. But
anyhow... If they have a good aquifer, we've seen
blueprints of the surface installation. It looks
like they'll be able to use this system to good
advantage. And we hope that once somebody has one
that they can deep walk up to and kick, that other
entrepreneurs then won't be so reluctant to put
their money in. Because this particular concept,
as Department of Energy have estimated, that
after it started, within about 10 years, it should
save about $12 billion worth of oil per year. We
think their estimate for the number of
installations is low, but the profit at each
installation is possibly a little bit high. But my
feeling would be, if the idea catches on, that it
should save considerably more than $12 billion.
We almost got the Kennedy International Airport
air conditioned with this system, They put so many
restrictions about spraying water into the air,
which might cause fog, which might create
hazardous conditions and so forth. They never
were able to get it materialized.
The other area we've been working in is in the
alternative energy of automotive fuels. We had
noticed in 1973 that the price of methanol, methyl
alcohol, It dropped so low that it, on paper at
least, would be cheaper to use alcohol as an
automotive fuel than gasoline.
This was true, but only for a momentary aberration
of the market. But it was enough to get us
interested in alcohol fuels.
And at about the same time, the oil embargo hit,
which indicated that the country may not be able to
enjoy all the petroleum that it's been used to, and
there'd be severe dislocations. And it became
apparent to most thinking people, I think, that
we're going to have to go to coal, of which we have
approximately a fifth or fourth of all the world's
resources, as our energy source, rather than
petroleum.
And we began to think that we perceived some tunnel
vision on the people. that when something like
this, that cars run on gasoline,
gasoline can be made from coal. So when the price is
right, this is what we will do. As chem engineers
and looking at the various processes, we find two
things. First, that the making methanol from coal
will probably always be less expensive than
making gasoline just by nature of the process.
Secondly, The technique or the technology for
making methanol from coal is firmly established,
whereas the gasoline from coal processes are very
iffy and technically need a great deal of work
before they really are worked out to the point that
they ought to be used. So our concept was that if
cars can run on methanol, and if methanol is less
expensive, we should start running our cars on
methanol. However, when we began looking into it,
we found quotations such as one from Chevron, for
example, where they said they had spent hundreds
and hundreds of thousands of dollars studying
methanol as an automotive fuel. And that
concluded it would never be a suitable fuel for
automotive use.
It turns out the reason for this is that the alcohol
takes about eight times as much. Well, there was
another form of tunnel vision, really. which went
something like this gasoline is a liquid you feed
gasoline through a carburetor alcohol is a liquid
obviously you should feed it through a carburetor
the problem is this doesn't work because alcohol
takes eight times as much heat to vaporize as does
gasoline
and your car just cannot furnish this amount of
heat so that when you try to run a carbureted
alcohol car while the car really will run rather
well. At the same time, you're spraying a mist or a
fog into your cylinders rather than a vaporized
fuel. And this has a number of problems. First, it
makes it very difficult to start the car. An
alcohol carbureted car is generally, without
help, won't start below 50 Fahrenheit. But some of
these droplets don't burn. They get on the walls of
the cylinder. where they tend to wash the
lubricant off of the cylinder. And as a result, you
get enhanced wear. Other problems also, some of
the droplets get down into the crank case where
they precipitate the stream wear additives that
are in the oil and otherwise react with the oil so
that the film strength of the oil is cut about 50%.
means it's no longer as good a lubricant as it was.
So you have additional problems. And lastly,
methyl alcohol in the crankcase will form formic
acid, which is corrosive and detrimental to the
engine. So looking at all of these things, we
decided that the route to go would be to vaporize
the alcohol and feed that into the engine rather
than carburet liquid into the engine, which
presumably putting in vapor will get rid of all
these wear problems. And it does one other thing.
It enables us to make a dual fuel vehicle, which
will run either on gasoline or on alcohol vapor. In
other words, the vapor system can be superimposed
on any given alcohol engine. We started working on
this, and have been working pretty steadily on it
for the last several years. And what we think we
have is a car that is perfectly drivable,
acceptable that runs on either gasoline or
alcohol with no change in drivability that's
noticeable. And so we think we have at the moment
probably the only viable economic and acceptable
alternative to letting the price of gasoline
continue to rise with the rise in OPEC prices
simply because an alternative now does exist to
make methyl alcohol and use it as a fuel. Well,
methanol right now is selling for 77 cents, which
is just about competitive with gasoline. But it's
right now being made from natural gas, which is
going up very rapidly in price and will go up much
faster, I presume, as soon as they decontrol the
price because natural gas has been held at an
artificially low price for many years for
political purposes. And we've been talking to
various people, the continental oil people,
Conoco. We've just converted two cars for them,
their use. They are interested in methanol,
unlike quite a few of the other oil companies,
because they own Consolidated Coal Company, who
owns the largest block of coal of any one company.
They tell us that they can make, in 1980 dollars,
methanol at the plant for 38 cents a gallon. Of
course, you have to add your markups to that. Well,
they haven't built those plants. They are
planning to build, or were planning to build, five
of them. Of course, they've just been merged with
DuPont, which may change the entire spectrum
there, because DuPont has been a producer of
chemical methanol for years, and it's been a very
profitable market for them. And if anyone were to
make a fuel-sized plant, just one plant, talking
in this small refinery, would be bigger than all of
the alcohol plants that are now being produced, or
the chemical market would just sort of evaporate
or get submerged. We think, however, that it is the
only alternative that exists at the moment, and we
think it's a very good one. And what we anticipate
is that the country may very well slide into what I
would call the methanol economy, where at least
our automotive industry vehicles and so forth
will be running on methyl alcohol. When do you
think that might occur? It will take quite a while
because we have a tremendous sized gasoline
inventory of cars and stations and refineries and
so forth. But I think it may happen sooner than you
might think. The Ford Motor Company people were
here just about a month ago and they informed us,
we've been dealing with them for quite a few years,
and they've been kind of down on our alcohol bet for
quite a while, but they informed us that it's now
their corporate opinion that the fuel of the
future may very well be methanol. Apparently this
is because the oil companies seem to, by and large,
all be changing their tune and taking a real
serious look at methanol now, and have all been to
the Ford company to see if they think cars will
indeed be able to run on methanol. We think the
system is a very useful system. It is, of course,
the university has a patent posture in the system
we devised. We kind of hope that eventually the
university and the rest of us can all make some
money out of this, but time will tell as far as that
is concerned.
What
we have is a system that really is a kit that will
mount on a car and allow it to be used for either
alcohol or gasoline. Now, down the road, I would
anticipate cars that run only on methanol, but we
think it would be at least 20 years before we could
switch over from one fuel to another. You can't
just say on some set date everybody starts driving
on methanol. It would take many, many years to
build even the plants to produce that much fuel.
And if you have to pay $10,000 for a car, I don't
think very many people would like a car that ran
only on alcohol and they had to stay within 100 or
200 miles or something like that of their home
base. So we think a dual fuel car at this moment in
time is essential and it may may turn out to be the
best route to go anyhow.
We have licensed the, well I guess the best way of
saying it is we have sold options to license this
system in Canada and in the Netherlands, and we're
having a lot of fun talking to all kinds of people
from all over the world. I've met people I would
never have met before in my life. For example,
we've had three vice presidents of Exxon, three
vice presidents of Shell, one vice president of
General Motors, one vice president of Ford,
president and vice...